Title:	Waxing and Waning: Delirium
Author:	W. Howard Buddin Jr., Ph.D.
Web:	http://neuropsychnow.com
Date:	03/02/2013
Tags:	Diagnostics  



We all learn about delirium during the course of our education and training. Not all of us get to see what it looks like, though, in all of its varied forms. 

Delirium is a syndrome marked by a sudden change in mental status as the result of any number of shifts in homeostasis. Its causes include sepsis, uncontrolled diabetes, withdrawal from alcohol, or allergic reaction to anesthesia used during a surgical procedure. The presentation of delirium is not uniform and is as varied as its causes -- hence its classification as a syndrome. 

Acute delirium is relatively easy to identify, especially when the individual is admitted as an inpatient as a direct result of their mental status change. One hallmark identifier is an alarmed and confused family. They'll tell you that their family member's behavior is not normal: "he's not a violent person…" or "It just happened so suddenly. She woke up in the middle of the night and didn't know where she was. Swore it wasn't our house. She wouldn't get near me…" and the like. Sometimes, though, delirium is chronic and insidious. It can persist, unchecked, as the product of an ongoing, unidentified process (such as a Urinary Tract Infection). It can be hard to spot. Really, really hard. The more there is going on with the patient, both from a medical and mental health perspective, the harder it gets. This is why delirium can be easy to miss or mistake for something entirely different.

Imagine the following clinical scenario.

>You've just seen a patient, a 78-year-old woman, whom you determine based on your bedside evaluation, a review of medical records, and the family's report, has been chronically delirious for the past twelve months or more. When you convey your clinical findings to the patient's family, they are understandably incredulous. They have taken her to many specialists over that period of time, none of whom had ever so much as *mentioned* this possibility to them. How could this be? 

Good question. 

How do you explain the variegated nature of delirium? Offer something that at once explains the nature of delirium and why it was/is so difficult to spot: 

>Delirium can be likened to phases of the moon: sometimes, big, bright, and impossible to miss, while at other times just a sliver of its full self. Finally, there are occasions when you can't see it at all, but it's still there. 

